/4/ Madam

Madame Rivail

Resident at the house of Monsieur Boudet

Propre at the Château-du-Loir

Sarthe

[Departure stamp] PARIS, September 26, 1846 (60)

[Arrival stamp] CHÂTEAU DU LOIR, September 27, 1846 (71)

/1/ I wanted to write to you the day before yesterday, then yesterday, my dear Amélie,
but I was forced to postpone it due to lack of time; even today I fear that I
will not be able to finish my letter in time to be able to send it. In any case, I do not think you are worried; and I will begin by saying that I am
fine.

The school year began on Tuesday; the number was very good for the
first day; There were 60—last year there were only 40. In the following days, a few more came, but I know that many are leaving until next Monday. As for the new ones, we only had one on the first day, not counting Crispoul, who returned. The new one is completely new, since she had not been announced; her parents know the Grandins, the Lerouxs and others; they came for the prize-giving; but they know the establishment mainly because of its reputation. They are not worried about the price. The child is going to her first <communion> this year. The little Lesquillers are returning definitively; one for the day shift, another for the night shift with her <young saleswoman>; in all, there will be five in the night shift.

As for the withdrawals, I do not know of any official announcement.

Ferran returned as if nothing had happened.

/2/ I hired an assistant recommended by Mr. Ballet. She is a young woman who seems quite suitable to me. Since she is not due to start until Monday, I have not seen her working yet; but another thing that will make you understand the need not to prolong your absence too much, although I feel how pleasant and necessary your presence is for your parents and how much a stay in the country can also be beneficial for you, is that Morin is leaving us. Her brother came to tell me that his parents regret not having their children anymore and that they are calling them back loud and clear. I have clearly expressed what I think about this way of acting and this instability of ideas. She will continue until we find someone; but we must replace her, which is very unpleasant, because she does her job very well. I have already started looking, but I have not found anyone yet; except a young woman of only 15 years old, with little presence and, by the way, very educated; I do not think that would be convenient. Besides, Mrs. Vorler has been seriously ill since yesterday, Thursday; so today we are two teachers short; so things work out as they can; fortunately, there are not many female students. /3/ I have another equally important piece of news to tell you, which you are certainly not expecting; it is the return of my uncle. Wednesday morning, at 8:30, I was working in my office when, to my surprise, I heard a man's footsteps coming up the stairs and saw him enter. Éloïse stayed in Aix; she had gotten rid of several objects to help him make the journey; he must still be at the hotel. There would be much to tell you about all this, but it would take too long. I will only say that he is now, if not materially, at least morally convinced of Éloïse's fraud and disloyalty; he is extremely indignant; he has been certain of this since he returned; until now he had only had suspicions, since he had made inquiries without finding anything that could put him on the path to reality. It seems that the sums taken by Éloïse are indeed significant. He has a strong hope of [illeg.] confessing what he did and of returning, if not all [illeg.], at least a large part. I will tell you more about this when you return, because I do not have time to go into details. I will tell you again that it has been decided that I will give a course at Monsieur Lévi's institution. It will be only once a week, on Saturdays, at 9 a.m. It will not be too much of a hindrance to me and may be quite useful to me; it will not bring me much money, since it is only 5 francs per class; but it will make me better known, perhaps it will provide me with some good private lessons and, at the very least, it will help to publicize my works. I should start on November 1st. /4/ Goodbye, my dear Amélie. Do not forget to send my regards to your dear parents, to whom I also wish the best harvests they may have. With all my love.

HLDRivail.

P.S.: My letter can only be sent tomorrow, Saturday.
